{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1344\cocoasubrtf720
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;\f1\ftech\fcharset77 Symbol;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\f0\fs28 \cf0 ## Hyphenation in the norwegian language\
\
Hyphenation (by newline) in the norwegian language is rule based. It is part of what is called tekniske skriveregler (technical writing rules), and is developed over many years with multiple sources; committee work including the professor in language Finn-Erik Vinje, standardization work and other. [Epost fra Spr\'e5kr\'e5det] These rules where made applicable in 1973 and first publicized in Finn-Erik Vinjes book Skriveregler. After stortingsmelding nr. 100, Norsk Spr\'e5kr\'e5d recieved the rensponsibility for givining guidance and clarify the correct rules for hyphenation. [Gunnar] Spr\'e5kr\'e5det has in their statue, paragraph 3 been giving the following role:\
	\
	"Spr\'e5kr\'e5det gir r\'e5d og rettleiing om tekniske skrivereglar og skal s\'e5 langt det er tenleg, klargjera kva reglar som er obligatoriske for korrekt spr\'e5k." [Epost fra spr\'e5kr\'e5det]\
\
### Rules for hyphenation in the norwegian language\
\
While some languages like enligsh-american uses quite easy to follow rules for standard hyphenation^1, norwegian, like many other european languages, uses non-standard hyphenation, which requires complex analysis to recognize all hyphenation points. E.g. the norgwegian word bokskatter can for instance be hyphenated as bok-skatter (book-treasures) or boks-katter (box-cats) depending on the context and meaning.\
\
Usually a word can be hyphenated at multiple points, like ape-kat-t-er. To find these points there are two rules in the norwegian language, ordleddsregelen (the rule of joint words) and enkonsonantregelen (the rule of one consonant). Some words should also never be hyphenated.\
\
#### Words that should not be hyphenated\
\
- Do not hyphenate one-syllable words\
- Do not hyphenate; \
	- abbriviations: etc.\
	- years: 2015\
	- dates and cohesieve number and character groups: 200 km/t\
	- forbindelser av ordenstall i numerisk form og substantiv: 17. may\
\
#### The rule of joint words \
\
	"Split words between meaningful and easily recognizable word parts."\
	\
For instance the hestevogn, a composition of the words horse and carriage, should be split between these two. This composite word uses a so called nullbinding, the word parts are simply conjoined. Some composite words follows other rules and introduces fugebokstaver. The norwegian word statsbank (state bank), consisting of stat and bank, inserts the fugebokstav "s". We also have fuge-e: mus + felle 
\f1 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  muse-felle. Some conjoint words have loss of vowel: skatte + kiste 
\f1 \uc0\u8594 
\f0  skattkiste, and lastly we have compisite words where fuging is forbidden: abc-leken (not abcleken). \
\
It is also possible to have words combine of more than two words. These words should be hyphenated in the main boundary.\
\
Remeber that the word components in a compound word also can be hyphenated using the for simple single words (non-compound). \
\
With compound words where the first word ends with two of the same consonant and the next word starts with the same conconant, there should only be two of these conconants in the fuge. But when hyphenated,it should be hyphenated like this: fotball-lag (with three conconants).\
\
There are other words that might not be too obvious for most people that they are composite words. Like the word atmosf\'e6re (atmosphere), where the word parts are fremmedord. This should be hyphenated as atmo-sf\'e6re. But if it is not obvious to the hyphenator the origin and etymology we can use the rule of one constant, and the word can be hyphenated as atmos-f\'e6re. [TODO: F\'e5 faktasjekket dette bedre, og presiser beskrivelse]\
\
- Some additional notes:\
	- B\'f8yningsformer can be hyphenated using this rule: frist-en\
	- Avledninger (derivated words) with prefixes can be hyphenated after the prefix: a-moralsk\
	- Avledninger with suffixes starting with a consontant can be hyphenated before the suffix: les-bar\
	- Avledninger with suffixes starting with a vowel can be hyphenated with the ordleddsregelen (but also rule of one cosonant): v\'e6r-else\
\
It is complicated enough for a computer to understand that a word is a compisiton of other words, without using a dictionary to look up in. With the rules of fugeord, loss of vowel and forbidden fuging, this task becomes quite complicated both for humans and especially computers. And with composite words concisting of one or more fremmedord it is not always easy to recognize the individual word parts.\
\
#### The rule of one consonant\
\
	"Disregard the meaning of the word, and let _one_ consonant follow to the next line." \
\
Non-compound words (or words percieved as it) with more than one syllable, including once as a part of a compund word is hyphenated using the rule of one consonant. For example the word skrape can be hyphenated like skra-pe. Note that it is not allowed to hyphenate the word as sk-rape is unacceptable, as there always has to be atleast one vowel on each line. This means that there always atleast has to be two characters on the following line (one consonant and one vowel), but that there can be one character alone on the first line (u-sosial). This in contrast to english-american hyphenation rules where it always has to be atleast two characters on each line. \
\
Some additional notes:\
- It is allowed to hyphenated between to vowels if the belong to their own syllable. \
- The letter x always belongs to the previous syllable.\
- The rule of one consonant can also be used in some cases of derived words and inflected words.\
- ng and gn are always hyphenated by this rule, disregarding the pronounciation.\
- B\'f8yningsformer can be hyphenated using this rule: fris-ten\
- Avledninger with suffixes starting with a vowel can be hypenated with the rule of one cosonant (but also ordleddsregelen): v\'e6rel-se\
\
Exceptions to the rules:\
- dh, gh, gj, kj, sc, sch, sh, sj, skj, sk should not be hyphenated if they reproduces the same sound and belongs to the same syllable.}