{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1344\cocoasubrtf720
{\fonttbl\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Cochin;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs56 \cf0 Why do we need hyphenation?\
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\fi360\sl288\slmult1\pardirnatural

\b0\fs28 \cf0 \
"Good typography is invisible, bad typography is everywhere."\
\
Most texts aim to communicate a set of points. The goal of typography is to reinforce the points of the texts. When good typography is applied to a text it should be invisible to the reader. Bad typography will be noticed and distract the reader from percieving the points communicated by the text. One important aspect of typography is the process of breaking paragraphs into lines, that will fit into a somewhat unnatural rigid frame. To make it easier to create lines of equal length, the typographer or the typesetting system usually has some room to adjust the spacing between words and in some cases the spacing between letters (but this is generally regarded as bad typography practice as it can make the words unconfortable to look at). For texts with long lines, like in text books with one page wide columns, this is usually enough to create lines of equal length. But when typesetting columns of short length, like in newspapers, this problem becomes much more complicated, and especially with a lot of long words. This is where the need to break words into two parts and let the second part of the word continue on the beginning of the next line --- what we call hyphenation. \
\
TODO: Eksempel som viser tre tilfeller av smal-kolonne-typografi. (1. Tekst uten justering, 2. tekst med stor inter-word-spacing, 3. tekst med riktig hyphenation).\
}