{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1344\cocoasubrtf720
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Hyphenation in the norwegian language:\
\
Hyphenation is the act of splitting a word when it extend beyond the right margin. A hyphen, -, is inserted at the end of the line to mark the hyphenation point. \
The purpose of this is to be able to create lines of more equal length. Either when you have the text aligned flush left and wan\'92t a less ragged right margin, or with \
a justified text where the spaces between words and glyphs are are streteched to align the left and right margin. Hyphenation will will result in a reduced need for \
stretching the spaces between words and glyphs, which sometimes can make them appear uncomfortable to look at. The same applies to centered text. [Vinje og Wikipedia og justification etc]\
\
While some languages like enligsh-american uses quite easy to follow rules for standard hyphenation^1, norwegian, like many other european languages, uses non-standard hyphenation,\
which requires complex analysis to recognize all hyphenation points. E.g. the norgwegian word bokskatter can for instance be hyphenated as bok-skatter (book-treasures) or boks-katter (box-cats) depending\
on the context and meaning. // Kan beskrive fugeord og sletteord her. [OpenOffice-tekst + Vinje]\
\
// Skrive litt om hvor reglene kommer fra og hvem som fastsetter dem.\
\
The rules:\
\
Usually a word can be hyphenated at multiple points, like ape-kat-t-er. To find these points there are two rules in the norwegian language, ordleddsregelen (the rule of joint words) and \
enkonsonantregelen (the rule of one consonant).\
\

\b The rule of joint words: 
\b0 Split words between easily recognizable word parts.\
\

\b The rule of one consonant: 
\b0 Always let one consonant follow to the next line. \
\
Untak:\
\
Usammensatte ord:\
\
B\'f8yningsformer:\
\
Avledninger:\
\
Sammensetninger:}